---
layout: post
title: "Run a .sql file in psql whenever you update it"
category: tech
tags: [postgres, psql, linux, bash, inotify, inotifywatch]
---

## Problem

When I'm writing a database schema in a `.sql` file, I make loads of mistakes. I often forget you can't have trailing commas in SQL (which is a shame because I love them) and mess up semicolons and things.

So I like to keep running `psql -f schema.sql` to check everything is working neatly.

Now I'm used to [jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com) and [nodemon](https://nodemon.io/) and [flask](http://flask.pocoo.org/)'s development server and other tools that watch for changes, I wanted a way of doing it automatically.

All these tools use the [inotify](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inotify) system in Linux that watches files.

## Solution

If you `sudo apt-get install inotify-tools` you can then use the `inotifywait` command.

This waits for a file to be modified. If you put this in a bash script (or type it out using semicolons instead of line ends) you can set up exactly what we need. I have in the directory containing `schema.sql` a script containing:

    #!/bin/bash

    function check_file () {
        psql -q -v "ON_ERROR_STOP=1" -f schema.sql && echo Checking schema.sql... Okay
    }

    check_file
    echo 'Watching for changes to schema.sql. Press Ctrl-C to quit.'
    while inotifywait -q -e MODIFY schema.sql > /dev/null
      do
        check_file
      done

## How it works

* the psql command is abstracted into the `check_file` function to keep things [DRY](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself) because I want to check it's okay once as soon as the script is run and then every time the file is saved.
* the `-e` option for `inotifywait` only listens for when the file is changed, rather than any event, which is the default
* the `-q` option for `inotifywait` suppresses telling you it is watching a file. The redirection to `/dev/null` hides a message whenever `schema.sql` is updated.
* the `-q` option for `psql` hides all the `CREATE DATABASE` type messages from `psql`.
* the `-v "ON_ERROR_STOP=1"`, which I got [here](https://stackoverflow.com/a/37073184/4699448) makes sure that the `psql` command returns a non-zero exit code, so that the message is only printed when there were no problems..
* `inotifywait` blocks synchronously, so this script just keeps waiting until `schema.sql` is messed with when it runs the command, until `Ctrl - C` is pressed.

## Thoughts

I'm not bash expert, so this is possibly a clumsy way of doing it, but it was fun finding out. It could easily be changed to any situation where you want to run something on a file whenever it changes, and there isn't already a builtin way of doing it.